======================================================================
TIER 3 — OPUS-MT FINE-TUNED — REPORT
======================================================================

model: Tier3_OpusMT_FineTuned
base_model: Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-hi-en
num_poems: 100
avg_bleu_vs_literal: 8.39
avg_bleu_vs_style: 6.1
avg_src_rhyme_density: 0.627
avg_tgt_rhyme_density: 0.257
avg_syllable_alignment: 0.0
hyperparams: {'phase1_epochs': 3, 'phase1_lr': 5e-05, 'phase2_epochs': 15, 'phase2_lr': 2e-05, 'max_len': 128, 'p1_sample': 50000}

----------------------------------------------------------------------

[0] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
अजब जुनून-ए-मसाफ़त में घर से निकला था
ख़बर नहीं है कि सूरज किधर से निकला था
ये कौन फिर से उन्हीं रास्तों में छोड़ गया
अभी अभी तो अज़ाब-ए-सफ़र से निकला था
ये तीर दिल में मगर बे-सबब नहीं उतरा
कोई तो हर्फ़ लब-ए-चारागर से निकला था
ये अब जो आग बना शहर शहर फैला है
यही धुआँ मिरे दीवार-ओ-दर से निकला था
मैं रात टूट के रोया तो चैन से सोया
कि दिल का ज़हर मिरी चश्म-ए-तर से निकला था
ये अब जो सर हैं ख़मीदा कुलाह की ख़ातिर
ये ऐब भी तो हम अहल-ए-हुनर से निकला था
वो क़ैस अब जिसे मजनूँ पुकारते हैं 'फ़राज़'
तिरी तरह कोई दीवाना घर से निकला था

REF LITERAL:
Had left the house in a strange passion
I don't know where the sun came from
Who left him on the same roads again?
I had just come out of a journey of torture.
This arrow did not land in the heart but without any reason
Someone had come out of the pasture.
Now this fire has spread from city to city.
This was the smoke that came out of the wall.
I cried late in the night and slept peacefully
That the poison of the heart had come out of Miri Chashma-e-tar
This sir who is now is for the sake of Khameeda Kulah.
This problem also came from our Ahl-e-Hunar.
Now what is that person whom Majnu calls 'Faraaz'?
Some crazy person had come out of the house just like that.

REF STYLE:
In strange obsession with distance I left my home that day
I know not from which direction the sun had made its way
Who left me once again upon those very roads to stray
When I had just emerged from travel's torment and dismay
This arrow pierced my heart, but not without a cause I'd say
Some word from the healer's lips had found its way
This fire that now spreads from city to city in array
Was smoke that from my walls and doors had made its way
I wept through broken night and then in peace I lay
For poison of my heart through tearful eyes had made its way
These heads now bowed in search of crowns to hold and display
This flaw too from us people of art had made its way
That Qais whom they now call Majnun, 'Faraz', I must say
Like you, a madman from his home had made his way

HYPOTHESIS:
Perhaps in love's passion it came out of my home
It doesn't know where the sun came from
Who has left this once again in their own paths?
I had just emerged from the torment of the beloved's face
This arrow in the heart did not fall without reason
Someone came out of every tongue's lips
Now this city that makes fire a fire spread
This smoke came from my wall's wall
When I broke the night's tears, I slept in peace
That the heart's poison had emerged from my heart'
Now this is my head, for the sake of the pure prayer
This ill-fate too, we came out of my life's way
Those who now call upon 'Dafaraz'
Like a tale, someone came out of the house with madness

BLEU literal: 15.41  BLEU style: 5.26  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
हवा के ज़ोर से पिंदार-ए-बाम-ओ-दर भी गया
चराग़ को जो बचाते थे उन का घर भी गया
पुकारते रहे महफ़ूज़ कश्तियों वाले
मैं डूबता हुआ दरिया के पार उतर भी गया
अब एहतियात की दीवार क्या उठाते हो
जो चोर दिल में छुपा था वो काम कर भी गया
मैं चुप रहा कि इसी में थी आफ़ियत जाँ की
कोई तो मेरी तरह था जो दार पर भी गया
सुलगते सोचते वीरान मौसमों की तरह
कड़ा था अहद-ए-जवानी मगर गुज़र भी गया
जिसे भुला न सका उस को याद क्या रखता
जो नाम लब पे रहा ज़ेहन से उतर भी गया
फटी फटी हुई आँखों से यूँ न देख मुझे
तुझे तलाश है जिस शख़्स की वो मर भी गया
मगर फ़लक को अदावत उसी के घर से थी
जहाँ 'फ़राज़' न था सैल-ए-ग़म उधर भी गया

REF LITERAL:
Pindar-e-Bam-o-Dar also went away due to the force of the wind.
The house of those who saved Charag was also lost.
The people in the safe boats kept calling
I drowned and crossed the river
Why do you raise the wall of precaution now?
The thief who was hidden in the heart also did his job.
I remained silent because I felt comfortable in this.
There was someone like me who also went to the door
Like burning and thinking desolate seasons
The promise of youth was strict but it also passed.
Who can remember the one who could not forget?
The name that was on my mind has also disappeared from my mind.
Don't look at me like this with tearful eyes
You are looking for the person who also died.
But Falak had enmity towards his own house.
Where Faraz was not, the soul of sorrow went there too.

REF STYLE:
The wind's fierce force swept away the pride of roof and door
Those who tried to save the lamp, their home was lost for sure
The ones in safety's boats kept calling out to me
But drowning, I crossed over to the river's distant shore
Why raise the wall of caution's guard at this late hour
The thief that hid within the heart has done its work before
I stayed silent, for in that lay my soul's peace
Someone like me there was who went to the gallows' floor
Like smoldering, brooding, desolate seasons passing by
Hard was the covenant of youth, yet it passed through time's door
Why should I remember one I could not forget
The name that stayed upon my lips slipped from my mind's core
Don't look at me with those torn and tattered eyes
The person that you seek has died, exists no more
But heaven's enmity was with that very house alone
Where 'Faraz' was not, grief's flood went there to pour

HYPOTHESIS:
By force of the wind, I went to the heart of the beloved's beloved
Those who saved the lamp's home too went away
They kept calling upon the boat's shores
I was drowned beyond the river's flow, I passed away
Now what do you lift up the wall of guard?
The thief who hid in the heart went to work
I kept silent, that in this very way, the world's way
Someone was like me, who came to love, but
Think of it as barren season's way
It was hard to keep the promise of youth, but it passed away
Who couldn't forget, what would he remember?
The name that remained on the lips, even the name came down from the lamp's door
Don't gaze at me with your eyes, I cannot see
You are searching for the person whose fate he died too
But his hatred for the beloved was from his own home's door
Where there was no separation, there went even beyond the cup's door

BLEU literal: 9.49  BLEU style: 4.51  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[2] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
इस से पहले कि बे-वफ़ा हो जाएँ
क्यूँ न ऐ दोस्त हम जुदा हो जाएँ
तू भी हीरे से बन गया पत्थर
हम भी कल जाने क्या से क्या हो जाएँ
तू कि यकता था बे-शुमार हुआ
हम भी टूटें तो जा-ब-जा हो जाएँ
हम भी मजबूरियों का उज़्र करें
फिर कहीं और मुब्तला हो जाएँ
हम अगर मंज़िलें न बन पाए
मंज़िलों तक का रास्ता हो जाएँ
देर से सोच में हैं परवाने
राख हो जाएँ या हवा हो जाएँ
इश्क़ भी खेल है नसीबों का
ख़ाक हो जाएँ कीमिया हो जाएँ
अब के गर तू मिले तो हम तुझ से
ऐसे लिपटें तिरी क़बा हो जाएँ
बंदगी हम ने छोड़ दी है 'फ़राज़'
क्या करें लोग जब ख़ुदा हो जाएँ

REF LITERAL:
before you become disloyal
Why don't we part, my friend?
you too turned from diamond to stone
Who knows what will happen to us tomorrow
your talent went beyond count
If we too break then we will be destroyed
let us also excuse our compulsions
then get stuck somewhere else
If we don't reach our destination
be the path to your destination
moths are late in thinking
turn to ashes or turn to wind
Love is also a game of luck
turn into ashes turn into alchemy
Now if we meet you then we will meet you
embrace me like this
We have given up worship 'Faraaz'
What do people do when they become God?

REF STYLE:
Before you turn unfaithful and betray
Why not, my friend, we part and go our way
You too from diamond turned to stone one day
Tomorrow who knows what we might become, pray
You who were unique, now countless in array
If we should break, we'd scatter where we may
We too will plead our helplessness and say
Then somewhere else get trapped in love's foray
If we cannot become destinations, nay
Let us become the path that leads the way
The moths have pondered long in disarray
Should they turn to ash or wind and fade away
Love too is but a game that fortunes play
Turn to dust or become alchemy's display
If next we meet, then we shall not delay
We'll cling so close, become your robe's array
I've abandoned worship now, O Faraz, I say
What can one do when people become gods today

HYPOTHESIS:
Before we become unfaithful, before we become loyal
Why not, O friend, let us separate ourselves
You too became a diamond's stone
We too go tomorrow, what should happen to us
You were the only one, I've become a lot more
If we too break through, let us become the world's target
Let us also make excuses for those who are forced
Then let there be another place where there's no trace
If we couldn't attain the destinations
Let the path to destinations become a way
We're in a moment's thought, but it's true
Go to ashes or become air
Love too is a game of fortune's art
Let the dust become dust's condition
If you meet now, then we'll meet with you
Let such tresses become the grave's face
We've abandoned 'Nisz', we've left
What can people do when they become God

BLEU literal: 9.28  BLEU style: 4.38  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[3] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
जिस सम्त भी देखूँ नज़र आता है कि तुम हो
ऐ जान-ए-जहाँ ये कोई तुम सा है कि तुम हो
ये ख़्वाब है ख़ुशबू है कि झोंका है कि पल है
ये धुँद है बादल है कि साया है कि तुम हो
इस दीद की साअत में कई रंग हैं लर्ज़ां
मैं हूँ कि कोई और है दुनिया है कि तुम हो
देखो ये किसी और की आँखें हैं कि मेरी
देखूँ ये किसी और का चेहरा है कि तुम हो
ये उम्र-ए-गुरेज़ाँ कहीं ठहरे तो ये जानूँ
हर साँस में मुझ को यही लगता है कि तुम हो
हर बज़्म में मौज़ू-ए-सुख़न दिल-ज़दगाँ का
अब कौन है शीरीं है कि लैला है कि तुम हो
इक दर्द का फैला हुआ सहरा है कि मैं हूँ
इक मौज में आया हुआ दरिया है कि तुम हो
वो वक़्त न आए कि दिल-ए-ज़ार भी सोचे
इस शहर में तन्हा कोई हम सा है कि तुम हो
आबाद हम आशुफ़्ता-सरों से नहीं मक़्तल
ये रस्म अभी शहर में ज़िंदा है कि तुम हो
ऐ जान-ए-'फ़राज़' इतनी भी तौफ़ीक़ किसे थी
हम को ग़म-ए-हस्ती भी गवारा है कि तुम हो

REF LITERAL:
Wherever I look, I see that you are there.
Oh my dear, there is someone like you that you are there.
This is a dream, a fragrance, a gust, or a moment.
Is this a fog, a cloud or a shadow or is it you?
There are many colors in this sister's voice.
I am that there is someone else, the world is that you are
Look, these are someone else's eyes or mine
Let me see, it's someone else's face that it's you
I would like to know if this old man stays somewhere.
With every breath I feel you are there
There is happiness in every joy of the heart and soul.
Now who is Shireen or Laila or you?
There is a spreading support of pain that I am.
It's a river full of joy that you are there.
The time will not come when even the heart will think about it.
There is no one like you alone in this city
Aabad, we are not killed by evil heads.
This ritual is still alive in the city that you are
Oh dear Faraz, who had such a privilege?
We are also saddened by the fact that you are

REF STYLE:
Whichever way I look, it seems that you are there
O life of the world, is this someone like you or you?
Is this a dream, a fragrance, a breeze, or a moment's flow
Is this mist, a cloud, a shadow, or is it you?
In this moment of vision, many hues tremble and glow
Am I here, is someone else, is the world, or is it you?
Look, are these someone else's eyes or are they mine
I wonder, is this someone else's face or is it you?
If this fleeting age would pause, then I would know
With every breath it feels to me that it is you
In every gathering, the theme of talk for hearts that pine
Now who is Shirin, who is Laila, or is it you?
A desert spread with pain is what I am, I know
A river risen in a wave is what is you
May that time never come when even my wounded heart would find
In this city someone lonely like us or is it you?
Not from the crazed do we populate the killing fields below
This custom still lives in the city, or is it you?
O life of 'Faraz', who had the fortune so divine
Even the sorrow of existence I can bear because of you

HYPOTHESIS:
Whatever state you see, it appears that you are
O life, where is this one like you, that you are
This dream is sweet, it's that the breeze is that moment
This smoke is a cloud that is a shadow that you are
There are many colors in this display of love's way
I am that there's another world that you are
Behold, these are the eyes of someone else, that I am
Let's see this face of another, that you are
If this age of separation remained, then this life would be life's purpose
In every breath I feel that you are
In every moment the heart of love's heart
Now who is it, that Lala is it that you are
There's a pain spreading, that I am
There came a wave, the river, that you are
That time did not come for even the heart's thought
In this city, there's a single one, that you are
We live, we are not bound by the tresses of love's door
This custom still exists in the city, that you are you
O life of love, who was such a guide that far
We too have the grief of grief that you are

BLEU literal: 12.89  BLEU style: 5.4  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[4] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
ख़ामोश हो क्यूँ दाद-ए-जफ़ा क्यूँ नहीं देते
बिस्मिल हो तो क़ातिल को दुआ क्यूँ नहीं देते
वहशत का सबब रौज़न-ए-ज़िंदाँ तो नहीं है
मेहर ओ मह ओ अंजुम को बुझा क्यूँ नहीं देते
इक ये भी तो अंदाज़-ए-इलाज-ए-ग़म-ए-जाँ है
ऐ चारागरो दर्द बढ़ा क्यूँ नहीं देते
मुंसिफ़ हो अगर तुम तो कब इंसाफ़ करोगे
मुजरिम हैं अगर हम तो सज़ा क्यूँ नहीं देते
रहज़न हो तो हाज़िर है मता-ए-दिल-ओ-जाँ भी
रहबर हो तो मंज़िल का पता क्यूँ नहीं देते
क्या बीत गई अब के 'फ़राज़' अहल-ए-चमन पर
यारान-ए-क़फ़स मुझ को सदा क्यूँ नहीं देते

REF LITERAL:
Why are you silent? Why don't you praise me?
If you have Bismil then why don't you pray to the murderer?
Rozan-e-Zinda is not the reason for this cruelty.
Why don't you extinguish Meher O Mah O Anjum?
This is also a style-e-treatment-e-sorrow-e-jaan
O foragers, why don't you increase the pain?
If you are a judge then when will you do justice?
If they are criminals then why don't we punish them?
If there is a desire, then the Mother of the Heart is also present.
If you are a friend then why don't you give the address of your destination?
What has happened to the present 'Faraaz' Ahl-e-Chaman?
Why don't you always give me friends?

REF STYLE:
Why are you silent, why don't you cry out against cruelty's sway
If slaughtered, why don't you bless the killer anyway
The prison window is not the cause of this wild dismay
Why don't you extinguish the sun, moon and stars' display
This too is a method to cure the heart's grief, I'd say
O healer, why don't you increase the pain and make it stay
If you are the judge, then when will justice hold its day
If we are the guilty ones, why don't you punish without delay
If you're a bandit, here's my heart and soul as prey
If you're a guide, why don't you show the destination's way
What has befallen the garden dwellers, come what may
Why don't my cage-companions call to me today

HYPOTHESIS:
Be silent, O beloved of love, you don't give
If there's reason, the killer doesn't pray to me
Fear's reason is not to blame for the loss of love's way
You don't give me the lamp of love's lamp
This too is the thought of love's way
O JGHO, pain's pain doesn't raise
If you are fair, when will you judge?
If we're criminals, we don't give the punishment
If there's weight, the heart's heart and heart are at rest
If there's hope, then the destination's address won't be known
What has passed, 'Naj', upon the people of heaven's garden
Love's love doesn't always make me a lover

BLEU literal: 4.31  BLEU style: 3.86  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[5] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
क़ुर्बतों में भी जुदाई के ज़माने माँगे
दिल वो बे-मेहर कि रोने के बहाने माँगे
हम न होते तो किसी और के चर्चे होते
ख़िल्क़त-ए-शहर तो कहने को फ़साने माँगे
यही दिल था कि तरसता था मरासिम के लिए
अब यही तर्क-ए-तअल्लुक़ के बहाने माँगे
अपना ये हाल कि जी हार चुके लुट भी चुके
और मोहब्बत वही अंदाज़ पुराने माँगे
ज़िंदगी हम तिरे दाग़ों से रहे शर्मिंदा
और तू है कि सदा आईना-ख़ाने माँगे
दिल किसी हाल पे क़ाने ही नहीं जान-ए-'फ़राज़'
मिल गए तुम भी तो क्या और न जाने माँगे

REF LITERAL:
There is a need for separation even in closeness
The heart asks for mercy under the pretext of crying.
If we had not been there, it would have been someone else's discussion.
The creation of the city requires a lot of words.
It was my heart that yearned for Marasima.
Now ask for this in the name of logic and connection
I am in such a state that I have lost my soul and have been robbed.
And love demands the same old style
Life we ​​are ashamed of our scars
And you are the one who always asks for a mirror.
Heart never listens to any situation Jaan-e-'Faraaz'
I found you too and I don't know what else I asked for.

REF STYLE:
Even in closeness, the heart seeks epochs of separation's pain
So merciless, it asks for reasons just to cry again
Had we not been, someone else would have tales to tell
The city's populace would still seek stories to entertain
This was the heart that once yearned for love's sweet refrain
Now this same heart seeks excuses to break the chain
Such is our state: defeated, plundered, lost in vain
Yet love still demands the same old ways remain
Life, we stayed ashamed because of all your stain
And you keep asking for mirror-chambers to sustain
The heart is never satisfied with any state, O Faraz, my bane
Even if we found you, what then—it would seek the unknown again

HYPOTHESIS:
Even in your dreams, ask for the days of separation
The heart that is free from the burden of weeping's plea
If we hadn't been anyone's church, we would have been
When you follow the path of love, you seek to say
This heart was that it was for the sake of my heart's desire
Now seek this logic's excuse of love's way
I've lost my heart, I'd lost, I still lost
And love seeks the same way, old age
Life we've been ashamed of the brands we'd see
And you're the one who seeks always the mirror's mirror
The heart doesn't bear any pain, O beloved's beloved
If you've met, what else you don't ask for

BLEU literal: 4.23  BLEU style: 2.17  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[6] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
साक़िया एक नज़र जाम से पहले पहले
हम को जाना है कहीं शाम से पहले पहले
नौ-गिरफ़्तार-ए-वफ़ा सई-ए-रिहाई है अबस
हम भी उलझे थे बहुत दाम से पहले पहले
ख़ुश हो ऐ दिल कि मोहब्बत तो निभा दी तू ने
लोग उजड़ जाते हैं अंजाम से पहले पहले
अब तिरे ज़िक्र पे हम बात बदल देते हैं
कितनी रग़बत थी तिरे नाम से पहले पहले
सामने उम्र पड़ी है शब-ए-तन्हाई की
वो मुझे छोड़ गया शाम से पहले पहले
कितना अच्छा था कि हम भी जिया करते थे 'फ़राज़'
ग़ैर-मारूफ़ से गुमनाम से पहले पहले

REF LITERAL:
Sakiya a look before the jam first
we have to go somewhere before evening
The nine arrested for loyalty have now been released.
We too were entangled a long time ago
Be happy O heart, you have fulfilled my love
people get destroyed before the end
Now at your mention we will change the topic.
How much love was there before your name?
An age of loneliness lies ahead
He left me the evening before
How good it was that we too used to live 'Faraz'
From unknown to anonymous before first

REF STYLE:
O cupbearer, one glance before the wine, before the wine
I must depart somewhere before the evening, before the evening
Newly caught in love's snare, efforts to break free are in vain
I too was tangled deep in the net, before the net, before the net
Rejoice O heart, for you kept faith in love till the end
People are destroyed before the outcome, before the outcome
Now at your mention I change the subject entirely
How much longing there was for your name, before your name, before your name
Before me lies the age of solitary nights
He left me alone before the evening, before the evening
How beautiful it was when we too used to live, O Faraz
From unknown to nameless, before nameless, before nameless

HYPOTHESIS:
A glance before a drink's flow
We have to go somewhere before evening before
One hundred thousand feet of loyalty's sway is now
We too were engaged before a lot of price before
Be glad, O heart, for love you brought forth
People are destroyed before the end comes
Now at the mention we change the matter's way
What longings were before your name's name was
Life has passed before me in the night of dawn's sway
He left me before evening
How good it was that we too lived, 'Naaz'
Before eternity, before ignorance

BLEU literal: 19.84  BLEU style: 7.87  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[7] ahmad-faraz
SOURCE:
वहशतें बढ़ती गईं हिज्र के आज़ार के साथ
अब तो हम बात भी करते नहीं ग़म-ख़्वार के साथ
हम ने इक उम्र बसर की है ग़म-ए-यार के साथ
'मीर' दो दिन न जिए हिज्र के आज़ार के साथ
अब तो हम घर से निकलते हैं तो रख देते हैं
ताक़ पर इज़्ज़त-ए-सादात भी दस्तार के साथ
इस क़दर ख़ौफ़ है अब शहर की गलियों में कि लोग
चाप सुनते हैं तो लग जाते हैं दीवार के साथ
एक तो ख़्वाब लिए फिरते हो गलियों गलियों
उस पे तकरार भी करते हो ख़रीदार के साथ
शहर का शहर ही नासेह हो तो क्या कीजिएगा
वर्ना हम रिंद तो भिड़ जाते हैं दो-चार के साथ
हम को उस शहर में ता'मीर का सौदा है जहाँ
लोग मे'मार को चुन देते हैं दीवार के साथ
जो शरफ़ हम को मिला कूचा-ए-जानाँ से 'फ़राज़'
सू-ए-मक़्तल भी गए हैं उसी पिंदार के साथ

REF LITERAL:
The atrocities increased with the arrival of Hijr.
Now we don't even talk with sadness
We have lived a lifetime with grief-e-yaar
'Mir' did not live for two days with Aazar of Hijr
Now when we leave the house we keep it
Izzat-e-Sadaat is also on the lookout along with Dastar
There is so much fear now in the streets of the city that people
When you hear the sound, you lean against the wall.
You roam the streets with a dream
You even argue with the buyer over that.
What will you do if the city itself is a disaster?
Otherwise we end up fighting with two-fours.
We have a construction deal in a city where
People choose the tomb along the wall
The honor that we got from Kucha-e-Jaanaan 'Faraz'
Su-e-Maqtal has also gone with the same Pindar

REF STYLE:
Anguish grew and multiplied with separation's despair
Now I don't even speak with those who'd my sorrows share
I've spent a lifetime bearing the beloved's grief and care
Mir lived not two days with separation's despair
Now when I leave my home, I set aside with care
On the shelf my honored turban, dignity laid bare
Such is the fear now in the city's lanes everywhere
Hearing footsteps, people press themselves against walls there
First you wander lane to lane with dreams beyond compare
Then you haggle and you quarrel with each buyer there
If the whole city turns preacher, what can one declare?
Otherwise we libertines will clash with two or four there
I desire to build in that city where with care
People bury the mason with the wall he'd repair
The honor that I gained from the beloved's street, Faraz
With that same pride I've walked toward death's affair

HYPOTHESIS:
The waves grew and grew, along with the flights of the caravan
Now we don't speak, but with sorrow and sorrow
We've lived a lifetime with sorrow's beloved
'Mir', don't stay with the arrows of the mirror's door
Now we leave home, we keep it in mind
On the side even honor's display, with the gatheringer
This is the fear that people in the streets of the city now
When they hear the bow, they begin to appear with the wall
For one dream, you walk the streets of the streets
You even quarrel on it with the buyer's buyer
If the city's city is not a city, what can we do to maintain it
If we turn to love, then we go with two of my friends
We have in that city the trade of the beloved's garden
People choose to kill, with the wall
Those shame that we met from the beloved's display, 'Naaz'
The wine of love has gone along with the same roseer's display

BLEU literal: 9.67  BLEU style: 4.25  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[8] akbar-allahabadi
SOURCE:
दिल-ए-मायूस में वो शोरिशें बरपा नहीं होतीं
उमीदें इस क़दर टूटीं कि अब पैदा नहीं होतीं
मिरी बेताबियाँ भी जुज़्व हैं इक मेरी हस्ती की
ये ज़ाहिर है कि मौजें ख़ारिज अज़ दरिया नहीं होतीं
वही परियाँ हैं अब भी राजा इन्दर के अखाड़े में
मगर शहज़ादा-ए-गुलफ़ाम पर शैदा नहीं होतीं
यहाँ की औरतों को इल्म की पर्वा नहीं बे-शक
मगर ये शौहरों से अपने बे-परवा नहीं होतीं
तअ'ल्लुक़ दिल का क्या बाक़ी मैं रक्खूँ बज़्म-ए-दुनिया से
वो दिलकश सूरतें अब अंजुमन-आरा नहीं होतीं
हुआ हूँ इस क़दर अफ़्सुर्दा रंग-ए-बाग़-ए-हस्ती से
हवाएँ फ़स्ल-ए-गुल की भी नशात-अफ़्ज़ा नहीं होतीं
क़ज़ा के सामने बे-कार होते हैं हवास 'अकबर'
खुली होती हैं गो आँखें मगर बीना नहीं होतीं

REF LITERAL:
Those noises do not wreak havoc in a heart of despair.
Hopes are so broken that they are no longer born.
My desires are also a part of my personality.
It is clear that pleasures are not lost in the ocean.
The same fairies are still there in the arena of King Indra.
But there is no shame on Shehzada-e-Gulfam.
The women here do not care about knowledge, no doubt
But they are not indifferent to their husbands.
What is the rest of my heart that I should keep from the world?
Those charming faces are no longer Anjuman-ara
I have become such an absurd person,
Winds do not destroy even the crops of flowers.
Havas 'Akbar' becomes helpless in front of Qaza
Cow's eyes are open but not without

REF STYLE:
In a heart that's lost all hope, no tumults can arise
My hopes have shattered so, they can no longer materialize
My restlessness itself is but a fragment of my being's whole
It's clear that waves can never exist apart from ocean's roll
The same fair maidens grace the court of Indra's royal ground
But for the rose-cheeked prince no more are they spellbound
The women here care not for knowledge, this is true
Yet from their husbands' care they never do eschew
What bond should my heart keep with this world's gathering anymore
Those captivating faces no longer grace the assembly floor
So weary have I grown of life's garden and its hue
Even spring's gentle breezes bring no joy anew
Before fate's decree, Akbar, all senses lose their might
Though eyes remain wide open, they possess no sight

HYPOTHESIS:
In the heart of the heart, those lightnings do not rise
Why should children be broken, that they are no longer born
My longings too are for one of my beings
It is evident that the waves do not become the ocean's flow
The same are they still in the spectacles of the king's display
But upon the garden of separation there is no shame
The women here are not ignorant of knowledge's meaning
But these husbands do not seek their own company's way
What rest of the heart, what rest, from the blood of the world
Those hearts no longer remain in love's domain
I've come to know this longing from the color of the garden's garden
Not even the winds of the rose's rose are filled with wine
In front of love's lips, 'Akbar'
The feet are open, but the eyes do not appear

BLEU literal: 10.09  BLEU style: 2.52  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[9] akbar-allahabadi
SOURCE:
दुनिया में हूँ दुनिया का तलबगार नहीं हूँ
बाज़ार से गुज़रा हूँ ख़रीदार नहीं हूँ
ज़िंदा हूँ मगर ज़ीस्त की लज़्ज़त नहीं बाक़ी
हर-चंद कि हूँ होश में हुश्यार नहीं हूँ
इस ख़ाना-ए-हस्ती से गुज़र जाऊँगा बे-लौस
साया हूँ फ़क़त नक़्श-ब-दीवार नहीं हूँ
अफ़्सुर्दा हूँ इबरत से दवा की नहीं हाजत
ग़म का मुझे ये ज़ोफ़ है बीमार नहीं हूँ
वो गुल हूँ ख़िज़ाँ ने जिसे बर्बाद किया है
उलझूँ किसी दामन से मैं वो ख़ार नहीं हूँ
या रब मुझे महफ़ूज़ रख उस बुत के सितम से
मैं उस की इनायत का तलबगार नहीं हूँ
गो दावा-ए-तक़्वा नहीं दरगाह-ए-ख़ुदा में
बुत जिस से हों ख़ुश ऐसा गुनहगार नहीं हूँ
अफ़्सुर्दगी ओ ज़ोफ़ की कुछ हद नहीं 'अकबर'
काफ़िर के मुक़ाबिल में भी दीं-दार नहीं हूँ

REF LITERAL:
I am in the world, I am not dependent on the world.
I have passed through the market, I am not a buyer.
I am alive but I have no dignity left.
I am not smart in every way.
I will pass through this house of celebrities helpless.
I am a shadow, I am not just a map, I am not a wall.
I am ridiculous, there is no need for medicine from the letter.
I have this pain of sadness, I am not sick.
I am that flower which has been ruined by the treasure.
I am not ready to get entangled with anyone.
O Lord, please protect me from the torture of that idol.
I am not a seeker of his kindness
There is no claim of piety in Dargah-e-Khuda.
I am not a criminal whose idol pleases me.
There is no limit to the absurdity of Akbar.
I am not a poor person even compared to an infidel.

REF STYLE:
I am in this world but not a seeker of the world's affair
I have passed through the bazaar but I am not a buyer there
I am alive yet life's sweetness no longer lingers anywhere
Though conscious still, I am not truly aware
From this house of existence I shall pass without a care
I am but a shadow, not a portrait fixed upon the wall's square
I am dejected, need no cure from counsel's wear
This weakness is my sorrow's mark, I am not one laid bare
I am that flower which autumn has left in despair
I won't cling to any hem, I am not a thorn to ensnare
O Lord, protect me from that idol's cruel snare
I seek not the favor of that beauty fair
Though I claim no piety at God's threshold of prayer
I'm not such a sinner that idols would declare me their heir
My dejection and weakness know no measure, 'Akbar', I swear
Against the infidel I cannot claim to be devout or prayer

HYPOTHESIS:
In the world I am not seeking the world's state
I have passed through the market, I am not a buyer
I am still alive, yet there's no rest to be
That I am in every consciousness, I am not a lover
From this world's world I'll pass without fear
I'm not a shadow of the straw's wall
I'm not in need of medicine with a sign
I'm not sick of grief's grief
I'm those who have ruined the beloved's voice
I'm not that one with a garment, I'll be it
Or, O Lord, keep me safe from the cruelty of that idol
I am not asking for her grace's grace
The path of separation is not in the state of love's display
From which idols may be, I'm not such a criminal to bear
Assurance is no limit to life, 'Akbar'
I am not even in opposition to unbelievers, yet I am no more

BLEU literal: 17.15  BLEU style: 13.88  Syllable alignment: 0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------

